Make sure there is enough room to move your arms around your leg .
This will ensure that you have room to work on your knee . , When
you start , hold the bandage in your hand . Make sure it starts out
rolled up . This will make it easier as you wrap it around your
knee . Position your hand with the wrap in it about two inches
below your knee joint . Take the loose end of the bandage and
place it just under the joint with your hand . Hold it there with
that hand while your other hand moves the bandage around your
knee . Wrap it all the way around once until the wrap comes around
to meet the loose end . Pull it snug to secure it .
Make sure to wrap over the end you started with and put a twist ( or
two , so that the roll returns to its original position ) in the
bandage directly above the end to hold it in place .
(a) LLaMA 3-70B generation fragment, several line breaks in the row
I just learned about broiling recently , but let ’s talk about
baking first . When you bake , you cook the food by surrounding
it with hot air . Because the hot air is all around the food ,
the food cooks from all the sides . If you use a toaster oven ,
you ’ ll notice that the heating elements are not really on when
you bake . They only turn on to keep the air at the temperature
you set . Heat transfer occur from the hot air inside and the hot
walls of the oven .
(b) LLaMA 7B generation fragment, anomalous spaces before punctuation marks (highlighted with red)
His wife . God ..... she was always so beautiful . We met at college ,
you see . The only woman I ever loved . And boy did I love her . I
never really got over her . I heard she got married , and it sucked
. I didn ’ t sleep for a week . Before I met her , I never realized
that " heartache " was literal . The pain went away over time ,
mostly . I mean , if I thought about her , I didn ’ t cry , I didn ’ t
cut myself . I could deal . Until her ass - wipe husband starts
running for President . All the media knew he was a jack - ass , but
she ..... she was made for the campaign trail .
(c) OPT 30B generation fragment, anomalously long ellipsis (highlighted with red)
Figure 5: Machine-generated text samples, various models, anomalous punctuation
10

Either use your fingernails or a pair of pliers to secure the stud
by folding down the spike ends on the inside of the shoe . Repeat
this process for all of the studs .
(a) LLaMA 3-70B generation fragment
This place it average at best . Our meal was a mixed bag of good and
bad . On the good side , took our reservations and when we showed
up on time we were promptly seated . Also , they had a very nice
Carpaccio appetizer . That was well done . That was it .... no more
good . On the bad side , all of the dinners were rather bland and
tasteless . My wife ’ s lamb chops were nothing to write home about .
(b) LLaMA 7B generation fragment
The first time I went there a couple of years ago , it was pretty
good . Then I went there a year ago and it was ok . Went again
tonight and in my opinion , it was some of the worst food I have
ever had . Like others have said , very inconsistent but either way
, I won ’ t be going back .
(c) OPT 30B generation fragment
Figure 6: Machine-generated text samples, various models, normal punctuation
, After scrubbing , allow the tattoo to sit for two hours without
washing the salty scrub off . Once the two hours are up , you should
wash it thoroughly with cold water for 5 -10 minutes . You may
notice some ink being washed away as the area is rinsed with water
.
In case there is any bleeding , it is recommended that you soak a
fresh , clean hand cloth in hydrogen peroxide and then press it
against the broken skin . This helps to disinfect the area and
prevent any infection .
It is also advisable to apply a small amount of vitamin E over the
area as this helps to promote healing and prevent the formation of
a scar . Vitamin E also helps to reduce inflammation and pain .
, Use a clean hand cloth to dry the skin and then an antibiotic cream
can be applied on top . Use sterile gauze to cover the area , which
can be held in place using tape from a first aid kit . This helps
to protect the area and prevent infection .
, The dressing can be taken off after three days and the area
assessed . If the skin is painful or reddened , it may be infected .
If this is the case , it is advisable to see the doctor or visit
the nearest hospital .
Figure 7: Human text fragment with anomalous line breaks before commas (highlighted with red)
11

Layer Length , .... \n ,
16 1033, 16028 - 2889, 8689, 14919 14919, 16028
18 7373 2199 3851, 12685, 16302 12685
20 8684 6631 8573, 11612, 12748 8573, 12267
Table 1: Features, that are the most sensitive to the length of samples and syntactic anomalies
St Clare ’ s Catholic Primary School in Birmingham has met with
equality leaders at the city council to discuss a complaint from
the pupil ’ s family . The council is supporting the school to ensure
its policies are appropriate . But Muslim Women ’ s Network UK said
the school was not at fault as young girls are not required to
wear headscarves . Read more news for Birmingham and the Black
Country The Handsworth school states on its website that " hats or
scarves are not allowed to be worn in school " alongside examples
including a woman in a headscarf . Labour councillor Waseem Zaffar ,
cabinet member for transparency , openness and equality , met the
school ’ s head teacher last week . In a comment posted on Facebook
at the weekend , claiming the school had contravened the Equality
Act , the councillor wrote : "I ’ m insisting this matter is addressed
asap with a change of policy .
Figure 8: Human text fragment, normal punctuation
persistently sensitive to markdown paragraphs (
##) and to repeating line breaks (\n\n).
Interestingly, we identified several features that
reacted to markdown paragraphs by hand (for ex-
ample, features 1033 and 15152 on the 16th layer
of our SAE). However, the fact that these features
were not captured by our algorithm suggests that
they lack sufficient stability under domain varia-
tion.
Only features 8689 and 14919 from Table 1
are among the best in detecting GPT models and
Bloom model families respectively (Table 15).
D.3 Attacks
To identify features most sensitive to attacks, we
switched to the RAID dataset (see Appendix C).
From this dataset, we selected three of the most
powerful generating models: ChatGPT-3.5, GPT-4,
and human. For each model and domain, we calcu-
lated the top-10 features that are the most sensitive
to each type of attack, using the same method as
for syntactic anomalies. Then, for each attack, we
took the intersection of the top-10 features across
all domains and generation models. The results are
presented in the Table 2.
As one can see, the Table doesn’t include "num-
ber", "paragraphs insertion", "alternative spelling",
"misspelling" and "paraphrase" attacks. This is so
because our method didn’t find the features that
would indicate these types of attack consistently
across all models and domains. Also note that this
time, we calculated the top-10 features not from all
available features but from the top 10% most im-
portant features for ATD based on XGBoost results.
If we calculate the top-10 from all possible features,
our strict method don’t capture any intersections.
The selected feature set does not intersect with
the best ATD detection features, whether general
or model- or domain-specific.
E Detailed results
We report detailed results for threshold-based clas-
sifiers. In Figure 16 we report general and model-
specific features for the 16 layer. The top features
by domains and models subsets are shown in Fig-
ures 14 and 15.
F Feature interpretations
Tables 3, 4, 5, and 6 present interpretation results
for key features, along with examples of texts show-
ing their highest values. In steering, we adjust a
feature’s value across all tokens, while in real texts,
it activates on only a few. We observe three acti-
vation patterns: token-level (e.g., missed formulae,
12