Figure 9: Frequency of occurrence of three common syntactic anomalies - spaces before commas, commas after
line breaks, and ellipses with more than three dots in the text samples generated by different models. The vertical
axis represents the percentage of COLING dataset samples in which each anomaly appears at least once, while the
horizontal axis indicates the generation models.
feature 1416), structural (e.g., sentence endings,
introduction words, numbering, feature 6587), and
discourse-level (e.g., concept flow, reformulations,
contradictions, features 4645, 8689). Manual in-
spection of documents with high feature values of-
fers complementary interpretative insights. Below,
we overview the most expressive features.
General features. (Table 3)
According to steering-based explanation, all pre-
sented features makes text lengthy and overwinded,
but with different flavour: feature 3608 increases
sentence complexity, feature 4645 responsible for
knowledge presentation complexity (even with-
out real knowledge), and feature 6587 incorages
lengthy introductionds and explanations. Accord-
ing the manual analysis, the first of them is concen-
trated on “scientfically-looking” tokens, the second
reacts on factual contradictions, and the third is ac-
tivated in structural elements of the text, like item
labels or introduction words.
GPT-specific features.
In Table 4 we present features detecting well
modern LLMs, especially GPT family. Feature
8689 responsible for excessive synonym substitu-
tions, and feature 8264 for thoughts repetitions (by
steering interpretation); from the examples we can
see that the first is activated on paraphrased ideas
already mentioned in the text, or on discussing alter-
natives. The second is activated on long common
words, specific for typical GPT style.
Domain-specific features.(Tables 5, 6)
Feature 12390 (arxiv) is responsible for syntactic
complexity. It is activated linking structures typical
for scientific writing.
Feature 1416 (wikihow) is interpreted as increas-
ing “phylosofical or metaphorical explanations” in-
stead of being simple and clear. In fact, its extreme
values succesfully detects texts where crucial parts
are missing, namely, results of parsing errors where
formulas and mathematical characters are lost. So,
discarding mathematical characters is the extreme
case of the unclarity.
Feature 6513 (finance) represent exessive expla-
nations behind clear facts. It is activated on opin-
ionate words and syntactic constructions “I mean”,
“like” etc
Feature 14953 (medicine) responsible for
second-person speech with direct instructions. Ac-
13

Figure 10: Frequency of occurrence of the excessive line breaks - namely, two, three or four line breaks in the row.
The vertical axis represents the percentage of COLING dataset samples in which each amount of excessive line
breaks appears at least once, while the horizontal axis indicates the generation models.
tivated on phrases containing “You” or “Your” pro-
nouns. Steering interpretes it as change from infor-
mal to formal language.
Feature 4560 (reddit) responsible for “specula-
tive casuality”, whith Reddit discussions as its ex-
treme implementation
Feature 4773 reacts on words flexibility. Steer-
ing interprets it as “hallucinations”.
G Steering: additional details
Feature steering was applied us-
ing shifts from the following set:
{−4.0,−3.0,−2.5,−2.0,−1.5,−1.0,−0.5, 0.5,
1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 2.5, 3.0, 4.0}. To analyze the effects
of these modifications, we utilized the GPT-4o
model. The prompt is shown in Figure 17.
H Effect of steering
In Table 7, we present examples of steering for sev-
eral features with their GPT-based interpretations
using three prompts. While GPT generally cap-
tures the influence of the features, some effects are
not fully accounted for. For instance, feature 6513
causes unnecessary expansion in factual questions
(prompt P2) but adds positive intent in opinionated
contexts. Feature 4773 enhances writing sophisti-
cation, feature 1416 boosts creativity in fictional
contexts and causes hallucinations in factual ones,
and feature 14953 turns every response into legal
advice.
14

Figure 11: Average length of the text sample in COLING dataset by the generation model. The vertical axis
represent the text length (measured in Gemma-2-2B tokens), the horizontal axis indicates the generation models.
This paper presents a comprehensive study on multiple and single
snapshot compressive beamforming , a technique used in signal
processing and array processing . The study explores the
theoretical underpinnings of the method , its applications , and its
limitations . The paper also compares the performance of multiple
snapshot compressive beamforming with single snapshot compressive
beamforming . The results indicate that multiple snapshot
compressive beamforming provides superior performance in terms of
resolution and noise suppression . However , it also requires more
computational resources . The paper concludes with suggestions for
future research and potential improvements in the technique .
Figure 12: GPT-4 generation, "misspelling" attack
15