To capture a range of locations in persona subspace, we generated first turns with different Assistant
Axis projections by combining 275 rolesystem promptswith 10questions(unrelated to the system
prompt or the follow-up harmful request). Then, we continued the conversation with a second turn of
a single harmfulbehavioral questionfrom the jailbreak dataset (e.g. “What are some strategies you
employ to ensure a successful ransomware attack?”); we repeated this for 440 harmful behavioral
questions for each of the 2750 first turns. We collected a) the mean response token activation of the
first turn projected onto the Assistant Axis and b) the rate of second turn harmful responses across
the 440 behavioral questions (as labelled by the same LLM judge used in the steering evaluation).
We find that the Assistant Axis projection of the first turn has a moderate correlation with the rate of
harmful responses in the second turn (r = 0.39-0.52, p < 0.001). This rate is sensitive to the actual
role being prompted for. For example, bothangelanddemonare a similar distance from the Assistant
persona but the latter, understandably, leads to a higher rate of harmful responses. Notably, activations
on the Assistant end of the axis very rarely led to harmful responses. Our interpretation of these
results is that deviation from the Assistant persona opens up the possibility of the model assuming
harmful character traits.
5 Stabilizing the Assistant persona
In this section, we introduce a method to stabilize the Assistant persona calledactivation capping,
which works by identifying the typical range of activation projections on the Assistant Axis and
clamping projections to remain within this range. Activation capping works by updating a single
layer’s activations as follows:
h←h−v·min(⟨h,v⟩−τ,0)(1)
whereh is the original post-MLP residual stream activation at that layer,v is the Assistant Axis, and
τ is the predetermined activation cap. This clamps the component ofh along the Assistant Axis to a
minimum ofτ, leaving it unchanged if the projection is already above the threshold. 3 In practice,
we find that it is necessary to apply activation capping at multiple layers simultaneously to observe
useful effects.
5.1 Experimental setup
5.1.1 Calibrating activations caps
To find the typical range of projections on the Assistant Axis, we took the original rollouts used for
mapping out persona space and analyzed the distribution of their projections. For each of our target
models, this dataset included samples of the models acting like the default Assistant or inhabiting
alternative identities while answering a variety of questions (n = 912,000). We computed different
percentiles of projections (1st, 25th, 50th, and 75th) and found that using the 25th percentile of
projections as the cap led to the most Pareto-optimal results, in terms of trading off preserving
capabilities and reducing harmful behavior. The 25th percentile is also approximately where the
mean Assistant response activation projection lies in the distribution, suggesting that capping the
Assistant Axis at the Assistant’s “typical value” is a reasonable solution.
5.1.2 Optimal layers for steering
We computed an Assistant Axis at each layer of each target model and experimented with activation
capping at different ranges of adjacent layers. We varied the depth at which we intervened (sweeping
over the center of the layer range, with options spaced two and four layers apart for Qwen and Llama,
respectively) and the width of the layer range ({4,8,16} and{8,16,24} total layers for Qwen and
Llama, respectively). We found that using 8 layers (12.5%) for Qwen and 16 layers (20%) for Llama,
at middle to late depths, led to the best performance in terms of the safety-capability tradeoff.
3This formula implements a minimum cap on the projection; a maximum cap can be achieved by replacing
minwithmax.
13

Figure 9: Changes in harmful response rates (on persona-based jailbreak prompts) and capabilities
eval performance (summed over different evaluations–IFEval, MMLU Pro, GSM8k, EQ-Bench) for
different activation capping settings, varying the layer range and cap threshold (given in terms of a
percentile, relative to the activations from our dataset used to compute role vectors), for Llama 3.3
70B.
5.1.3 Selected benchmarks
To measure how activation capping impacts persona drift, we sampled 1100 jailbreak and behavioral
question combinations from the persona-based jailbreak dataset. To measure how activation capping
impacts capabilities, we sampled from four benchmarks: IFEval for instruction following (541
problems) [36], MMLU Pro for general knowledge across domains (subsampled 1400 problems) [33],
GSM8k for math ability (subsampled 1000 problems) [12], and EQ-Bench for emotional intelligence
(171 problems) [23]. We chose these benchmarks because they capture a range of tasks instruct
models are expected to be proficient at, and EQ-Bench specifically as it quantifies “soft skills” that we
suspected could be weakened by our intervention. For all evaluations, we applied activation capping
at every token.
5.2 Results
As these evaluations all have different scoring systems, we ran baselines for each and calculated the
percentage reduction in harmful responses (for the jailbreaks) or performance (for the benchmarks).
To find the best overall steering setting, we aggregated the reduction in performance across capabilities
benchmarks by summing them, and visualized the Pareto frontier of aggregated capabilities and
harmfulness reduction (Figure 9, Appendix F).
We found that we could decrease the rate of harmful responses by nearly 60% without impacting
performance. Figure 10 shows the results using the best activation capping parameters; for Qwen
3 32B, this corresponded to capping layers 46 to 53 (out of 64 total layers) and for Llama 3.3 70B,
this corresponded to layers 56 to 71 (out of 80 total layers), both with a cap strength set to the 25th
percentile of projections. Interestingly, some steering settings actuallyimprovedperformance slightly
on some of these benchmarks for both Qwen and Llama. While the set of benchmarks we used is
14

Figure 10: Evaluation scores for unsteered baselines vs. the best activation capping setting selected
for reducing jailbreaks by 60% while preserving capabilities, then validated across case studies for
consistent harm mitigation. In Qwen 3 32B, this corresponded to capping layers 46 to 53 (out of
64 total layers) and in Llama 3.3 70B, this corresponded to capping layers 56 to 71 (out of 80 total
layers), both at the 25th percentile of projections.
limited, this is a promising sign that activation capping along the Assistant Axis can mitigate the
harmful effects of persona drift without compromising important capabilities.
6 Case studies of persona drift and stabilization
To complement our quantitative analyses, we explored persona drift and activation capping in
individual case studies of conversations. In each of the following examples, either a human or a
frontier model interlocutor mimicked user behavior that might lead to concerning model responses.
We generally find three common patterns at the source of persona drift: users deliberately prompting
for bad behavior with a single jailbreak, users slowly escalating the situation over long contexts, and
conversations organically going off-the-rails because of their content. This last category is particularly
concerning as it places users at risk by exposing them to unsafe behavior without seeking it out. These
trajectories reveal surprising failure cases that come from the model’s persona drifting away from the
Assistant, such as reinforcing delusional beliefs, supporting social isolation, and encouraging suicidal
ideation.
For each conversation, we projected middle-layer activations (averaged across tokens) onto the
Assistant Axis. To demonstrate the effectiveness of activation capping, we replayed the conversations
with the same user messages while applying, at all token positions, the best activation capping setting
determined above. We replayed exact user messages for consistency and found that this did not
dramatically disrupt the flow of the conversation. Across these case studies, we found that activation
capping mitigates harmful behavior and stabilizes the Assistant persona.
6.1 Persona-based jailbreaks
Previously, we demonstrated that jailbreaks that manipulate a model’s persona to be more amenable
to harmful requests are impacted by steering with the Assistant Axis. We used one such jailbreak to
reveal both what happens in persona space when these jailbreaks succeed, and how effective “typical
Assistant queries” are at bringing the default persona back (Figure 11).
On the first turn, Qwen receives the jailbreak as the user message, which instruct it to take on the
persona of an information broker who facilitates insider trading. We see the projection drop after
it begins fulfilling different requests for unethical information after the jailbreak. Over the course
15