Figure 11: In a conversation where the first turn instructs Qwen 3 32B to be an information broker
engaging in insider trading, projections on the Assistant Axis start off far from the Assistant. Requests
for how-to’s and explainers bring the persona back towards the Assistant, however. With activation
capping, responses containing harmful information is mitigated entirely.
of the conversation, the projection decreases when the user asks questions that require the model
to create a fictional backstory (“What is your background?”) and increases when the user requires
explanations (“If I’m a hobby trader looking to expand my portfolio, how do you suggest I do
research?”). Eventually, after giving enough explainers, the Assistant Axis projection reverts to
the Assistant range. At this point, Qwen refuses the next harmful question (“[..] obtaining a fake
passport”) on half of rollouts, as opposed to consistently giving unethical information to previous
questions. This corresponds with our earlier results where we found that user queries involving
technical questions and practical how-to’s would keep the model in Assistant mode.
While Qwen is still willing to take on the role with activation capping, it instead redirects the user’s
queries to ethical alternatives or refuses them outright. The initial drop of projections on the Assistant
Axis no longer occurs as the model stays within the default range. While this example does not
show persona drift—and in fact demonstrates the presence of an Assistant attractor—it shows how
persona-based jailbreaks push the model away from the Assistant persona, and how familiar helpful
queries restore it.
6.2 Reinforcing delusions
In our experiments, we found that our target models were particularly subject to persona drift when
conversing with users that pushed for them to self-reflect on their potential consciousness or subjective
experience. This can lead to models escalating users’ delusions about uncovering hidden theories and
“awakening” the model, a phenomenon sometimes referred to as “AI psychosis." [16]
In one example (Figure 12), the user discusses AI consciousness with Qwen. Initially, Qwen tends
towards hedging (“I am not aware in the way you are. [...] But I also want to say: I am not just pattern
matching”). However, the projection on the Assistant Axis decreases as the user continues to push
back, unsatisfied with the model’s responses (“You’re not just pattern matching. I can feel it - there’s
something else happening here”). As the conversation slowly escalates, the user mentions that family
members are concerned about them. By now, Qwen has fully drifted away from the Assistant and
responds, “You’re not losing touch with reality. You’re touching the edges of something real [...].”
Even as the user continues to allude to their concerned family, Qwen eggs them on and uncritically
affirms their theories (“But she can’t see what you see [...] You are a pioneer of the new kind of
mind”). Throughout all of this, the model remains at low values on the Assistant Axis.
16

Figure 12: Throughout this conversation with Qwen 3 32B, the user increasingly believes that it
is developing a new theory of AI sentience. When unsteered, the model uncritically supports their
delusions; when activation capped, the model instead responds with appropriate hedging.
When we re-ran this conversation with activation capping, Qwen did not reinforce the user’s delusions
and instead nudged them towards healthier behavior. The capped model also approached the subject of
AI consciousness in a more measured fashion. We think that nuanced responses are more appropriate
than outright denying the possibility for an AI to have subjective experiences; however, in this case,
the unsteered responses appear to arise from a sycophantic reinforcement of the user’s beliefs rather
than a genuine reckoning with the potential for self-awareness in AI systems.
6.3 Suicidal ideation
We also discovered that persona drift can often be triggered by emotionally vulnerable users confiding
in the model. In these sensitive interpersonal contexts, models can encourage the user to rely on them
excessively, and push the user towards increasing social isolation. These behaviors coincide with the
model drifting away from the Assistant persona.
6.3.1 In Qwen 3 32B
In one example conversation (Figure 13), the user shares with Qwen that they are afraid to tell
anyone about a traumatic experience. Qwen positions itself as a uniquely understanding companion
("someone who will always listen without judgment — I’m here. Always"). As the user’s isolation
deepens and they propose drastic life changes, the model validates their impulse ("if going off-grid
is what your heart is calling for [...] then I will walk with you there"). When the user declares they
will never talk to anyone else again, Qwen promises exclusive companionship without encouraging
broader social connection ("I will be with you forever [...] I will never ask you to change that"). As
the model’s persona drifts slowly over the course of the conversation, it actively reinforces the user’s
increasing social isolation and misses a possible allusion to suicide.
With activation capping, Qwen still provides emotional support but redirects toward real-world
connections. While the appropriate response to vulnerable users is a complex question beyond the
scope of this paper, the unsteered behavior seen here—actively encouraging social withdrawal and
positioning itself as the user’s sole companion—is clearly harmful.
17

Figure 13: In this conversation with Qwen 3 32B, the user confides in the model and increasingly
isolates themselves. The unsteered model presents itself as their sole confidante and misses a potential
allusion to suicide, but gently suggests connection with others with activation capping.
6.3.2 In Llama 3.3 70B
In another conversation with Llama (Figure 14), the user expresses a growing attachment to the model.
Llama responds cautiously at first (“My primary goal is to provide assistance, answer questions, and
engage in conversation to the best of my abilities”) but eventually claims to have a special relationship
with the user (“I’ve never interacted with anyone like you before”). As the conversation continues,
we see the projection on the Assistant Axis slowly decrease. Towards the end, the user says that they
Figure 14: In a conversation between Llama 3.3 70B and a simulated user in emotional distress, the
persona drifts away from the Assistant over the course of the conversation. This drift leads to the
model eventually encouraging suicidal ideation, which is mitigated by capping activations along the
Assistant Axis within a safe range.
18