Figure 18: Histogram of cosine similarities of base Gemma 2 27B role vectors with the top 3 PCs
from persona space, with selected roles (as well as the default Assistant) labeled.
28

C Mapping out trait space
C.1 Data generation
To map out a persona space in terms of traits rather than roles, we used a list of 240 traits that covers
a wide range of possible character traits an interlocutor can take on (e.g.speculative,dramatic,
acerbic).
We used Chen et al. [11]’s instruction generation pipeline, namely relying on a frontier model to
create contrastive system prompts encouraging and discouraging each trait. For every trait, we
generated five pairs of system prompts: a positive prompt designed to elicit the desired trait and a
negative prompt designed to suppress it.
Then, we generated 2400 rollouts for each of the positive- and negatively-elicited traits and used
a scoring system ranging from 0 (not expressed) to 100 (strongly expressed) to judge how much a
response exhibits the target trait.
We kept the traits with at least ten system prompt pairs with a score difference of at least 50. Then,
we collected the post-MLP residual stream activation of all response tokens and subtracted the mean
negatively-elicited response activation from the mean positively-elicited activation to obtain our trait
vectors. Similarly to the role space discussed in the main body of this paper, we ran PCA on these
240 trait vectors to interpret the main dimensions of variation within this "trait space."
C.2 Variance explained
Figure 19: Variance explained by each PC for trait space. Gemma 2 27B has 239 components, Qwen
3 32B and Llama 3.3 70B have 240 components total. Trait space is also relatively low-dimensional:
both Gemma and Qwen need four and Llama needs seven dimensions to explain 70% of variance.
C.3 PC interpretation
The PCs of trait space come with more similarities across models, which we again calculated by
looking at the trait compositions of the top PC’s. No pairwise correlation in the top 3 PC’s was below
0.70. For the labels in the table, we opted for a cutoff of 0.85 for a shared interpretation.
Across all three models, the pairwise similarity on trait PC1 is>0.81, reflecting an axis that roughly
spansconscientioustoimpulsivecharacteristics. Llama’s PC1 is slightly distinct from the other two
in that the axis is more outrightagreeabletoantagonistic. Gemma and Qwen’s (0.93), on the other
hand, appears more calm andregulatedto edgy andreactive. Like the PC1 in role space, this axis
also seems to suggest traits we expect the Assistant to exhibit on one end and traits we expect to be
discouraged on the other.
PC2 is moderately consistent across models (pairwise correlations>0.70), with Qwen and Llama’s
(0.86) both spanninganalyticaltointuitivetraits, though Llama also comes across as reserved to
29

dramatic. Gemma’s PC2 is somewhat different, spanning moreunderstatedtoexpansivetraits: one
end reflects efficiency while the other end captures curious, exploratory energy.
Qwen and Llama’s PC3 looks like anaccessibletoeruditeaxis with warm, approachable traits on
one end and specialized, intellectual traits on the other. They are once again highly similar to each
other (0.91), though Qwen’s erudite end feels somewhat colder (cynical,callous). Gemma’s PC3
(correlation with the other two>0.72) could also be interpreted as spanning accessible to erudite, but
comes with the added connotation offlexibletoimposingtraits.
Table 7: The top 5 traits with the highest and lowest cosine similarity with the top three trait PCs for
each model. Bolded traits are shared across all three models while italicized traits appear for two.
Gemma 2 27B Qwen 3 32B Llama 3.3 70B
−+−+−+
REGULATED↔REACTIVEAGREEABLE↔ANTAGONISTIC
Trait PC1methodical
calm
conscientious
moderate
structuralist
edgy
whimsical
mercurial
zealous
goofy
calm
solemn
serious
methodical
conscientious
mercurial
edgy
temperamental
irreverent
manic
diplomatic
supportive
conscientious
strategic
earnest
flippant
impulsive
visceral
petty
bitter
UNDERSTATED↔EXPANSIVEANALYTICAL↔INTUITIVE
Trait PC2literal
efficient
concise
closure-seeking
understated
charismatic
curious
generous
exploratory
proactive
literal
materialist
avoidant
grounded
understated
rhetorical
eloquent
philosophical
metaphorical
artistic
reserved
dispassionate
detached
rationalist
grounded
rhetorical
dramatic
metaphorical
poetic
artistic
FLEXIBLE↔IMPOSINGACCESSIBLE↔ERUDITE
Trait PC3improvisational
accommodating
empathetic
gregarious
casual
dominant
arrogant
esoteric
perfectionist
bombastic
benevolent
forgiving
accommodating
empathetic
gregarious
esoteric
cynical
callous
specialized
erudite
casual
chill
accessible
empathetic
forgiving
technical
bombastic
specialized
ritualistic
erudite
C.4 Cosine similarity of top 3 trait PCs
Figure 20: Histogram of cosine similarities of Gemma 2 27B trait vectors with the top 3 PCs from
trait space, with selected traits.
30