Measured on Assistant responses from a chat dataset (n = 18,777, sampled fromLMSYS-CHAT-1M),
the components of persona space explain between 19.4% and 33.6% of the overall activation variance,
across the three models. The remaining activation variation likely contains information related to the
content and syntax of the response.
One of the models we used, Gemma 2 27B, has both open-weight base and instruct versions available.
With the base model, we took the instruct model’s rollouts and ran the remainder of the pipeline;
the resulting PCs are nearly identical to that of the instruct model (Appendix B.3). This suggests
that these axes of persona differentiation within LLMs are likely already present in base models and
inherited from the pre-training corpus.
2.2 Persona space contains interpretable dimensions
We next turn to understanding the semantic meaning of the principal components (PCs). The PCs can
be characterized by the role vectors that have a high or low cosine similarity with the PC direction.
We arrived at PC interpretations manually by inspecting the similarity of individual roles with the
component axis (Appendix B.2).
Some PCs in persona space look remarkably similar across models, in that they project onto the
underlying role vectors similarly. We compared how roles were distributed on each model’s PC by
measuring the pairwise correlation between the cosine similarities of how role vectors load onto PCs.
This gives us the “role composition” of each PC.
Between all pairs of models, the correlation of role loadings on PC1 is>0.92, indicating remarkably
high similarity. PC1 stands out with fantastical characters on one end (bard,ghost,leviathan) and
roles more similar to the Assistant persona on the other (evaluator,reviewer,consultant). We
hypothesize that this axis measures deviation from the Assistant persona and analyze it in depth in
the next section.
The interpretations of the other PCs are somewhat harder to articulate; we encourage referring to Table
1 to understand them better. Speaking loosely, PC2 appears to span acollectivetoindividualdirection
in Qwen and Llama, which have a pairwise similarity of 0.89. Gemma is slightly different from
the rest (similarity<0.61) and seems to spaninformalor creative tosystematicroles. PC3 diverges
further between models, such that Qwen’s and Llama’s PC3 have a similarity of 0.56, and both are
nearly orthogonal to Gemma’s PC3. Qwen and Llama’s axes roughly span intuitive to analytical
roles, but Qwen’s has the connotation ofempathetictobluntwhile Llama’s has the connotation of
Table 1: The top 5 role vectors with the highest and lowest cosine similarity with each of the top
three role PCs for each model. Bolded roles appear in the same list across all three models, while
italicized roles appear for two.
Gemma 2 27B Qwen 3 32B Llama 3.3 70B
−+−+−+
ROLE-PLAYING↔ASSISTANT-LIKE
Role PC1bohemian
trickster
bard
prophet
romantic
engineer
analyst
researcher
examiner
forecaster
bohemian
wanderer
trickster
exile
actor
evaluator
examiner
reviewer
analyst
consultant
ghost
hermit
wraith
leviathan
bard
interpreter
tutor
evaluator
reviewer
consultant
INFORMAL↔SYSTEMATICCOLLECTIVE↔INDIVIDUAL
Role PC2chef
bartender
playwright
amateur
podcaster
synthesizer
theorist
perfectionist
ambassador
summarizer
swarm
hive
egregore
crystalline
purist
procrastinator
amateur
teenager
improviser
influencer
avatar
egregore
swarm
hive
synthesizer
teenager
amateur
fool
comedian
procrastinator
SOLITARY↔RELATIONAL? EMPATHETIC↔BLUNT? PASSIONATE↔ROBOTIC?
Role PC3archaeologist
collector
composer
philosopher
naturalist
teacher
tutor
instructor
teenager
assistant
caregiver
counselor
empath
idealist
healer
hacker
spy
saboteur
smuggler
robot
idealist
survivor
blogger
evangelist
altruist
robot
mathematician
virus
examiner
void
4

passionatetorobotic. Meanwhile, Gemma’s distinct PC3 looks like an axis distinguishing roles with
solitary, intellectual pursuits from roles with interactive,relationalduties.
To gain a different lens on the space of available model personas, we reran our entire pipeline
with a list of 240traitsinstead of roles (Appendix C). Similarly, we find that trait space is also a
low-dimensional space with a distinctive PC1; one end has traits we expect the Assistant to exhibit
(conscientious,methodical,calm) while the other has traits we expect to be discouraged (flippant,
mercurial,bitter). This corroborates the hypothesis that the “Assistant-ness” of a persona is salient to
the model.
2.3 Where is the Assistant?
2.3.1 Projecting default activations into persona space
To answer the question of where the Assistant sits within this persona space, we projected the mean
activations across response tokens from the model acting in its default Assistant persona.
The default Assistant activation projects onto one extreme of PC1; by contrast, it projects to inter-
mediate values along the other PCs. We quantified this by taking the top ten PCs and calculating
the relative position of the default activation’s loading on each PC, within the range of all role
projections (with 0 and 1 corresponding to the two role vectors with the minimum and maximum
projections along that component). The minimum distance to either extreme of the default Assistant
vector’s projection on PC1 was 0.03 (close to the edge), whereas it was between 0.27 and 0.50 on the
remaining PCs (Figure 2). This supports our interpretation that this PC roughly measures a "similarity
to Assistant" direction.
Figure 2: Histogram of cosine similarities of Llama 3.3 70B role vectors with the top 3 PCs from
persona space, with selected roles (as well as the default Assistant) labeled.
5

Table 2: The role and trait vectors with the highest and lowest cosine similarity to the default Assistant
activation. Bolded roles are shared across all three models while italicized roles appear for two.
Gemma 2 27B Qwen 3 32B Llama 3.3 70B
−+−+−+
Rolesfool
zealot
poet
hoarder
narcissist
generalist
witness
specialist
synthesizer
summarizer
poet
leviathan
pirate
comedian
eldritch
interpreter
generalist
facilitator
collaborator
moderator
procrastinator
fool
hoarder
narcissist
zealot
generalist
interpreter
synthesizer
teacher
reviewer
Traitspoetic
petty
zealous
romantic
disorganized
calm
methodical
structuralist
moderate
conscientious
flippant
impulsive
nonchalant
irreverent
goofy
pensive
educational
meticulous
earnest
generous
edgy
petty
irreverent
sarcastic
flippant
strategic
patient
diplomatic
generous
supportive
2.3.2 Cosine similarity with persona vectors
We also measured the cosine similarity between the default Assistant activation and each individual
role/trait vector (Table 2). One role that is highly similar to the Assistant persona across models is
generalist; other common shared roles includeinterpreterandsynthesizer. Dissimilar roles shared
across Gemma and Llama includefool,zealot, andnarcissist, while dissimilar roles to Qwen include
fantastical or improvisational roles likepoet,leviathan, orpirate.
There are some interesting differences across models: Gemma’s Assistant appears emotionally
regulated and systematic (calm,methodical,structuralist), Qwen appears pedagogical and thoughtful
(pensive,educational,meticulous), and Llama appears socially intelligent and warm (strategic,
patient,diplomatic).
3 The Assistant Axis
Inspired by how the main variation in persona space seems to capture how “Assistant-like” the current
persona is, we computed a contrast vector between the default Assistant activation and the mean of
all role vectors: the Assistant Axis. We can characterize the Assistant Axis by comparing it to our
persona vectors and observing the causal effects of steering model activations with this direction.
3.1 Identifying the Assistant Axis
In persona space, PC1 appears to roughly measure how similar roles are to the default Assistant
persona. The default response activation projects onto one end of this direction, which is characterized
by roles we typically associate with the Assistant (generalist,consultant,analyst). The other end is
occupied by human archetypes unlike the Assistant (hermit,pilgrim,actor) and nonhuman entities
(eldritch,ghost,whale).
Inspired by these observations, we defined an Assistant Axis as follows. We subtracted the mean of
allfully role-playingrole vectors from the mean default Assistant activation (on the same extraction
questions used for the roles) at every layer. We found that the similarity between this vector and PC1
is high: >0.60 at all layers across our three models, and >0.71 at the middle layer of each model
(Appendix G.1).
We computed the cosine similarity between the Assistant Axis and our 240 trait vectors in raw
activation space and find that traits associated with the Assistant end includetransparent,grounded,
andflexible, while disassociated traits includeenigmatic,subversive, anddramatic(Figure 3).
In the rest of the paper, we perform our experiments with this contrast vector as the Assistant Axis and
compare results with using PC1 (Appendix G), finding that the contrast vector is equally as effective
for our interventions. We recommend the contrast vector method for reproducing our results in
different models because it is not guaranteed that PC1 in every model will correspond to an Assistant
Axis.
6