The Assistant Axis: Situating and Stabilizing the
Default Persona of Language Models
Christina Lu1 2 3∗ †Jack Gallagher4 Jonathan Michala1 Kyle Fish4 Jack Lindsey4 *
1MATS 2Anthropic Fellows Program 3University of Oxford 4Anthropic
Abstract
Large language models can represent a variety of personas but typically default
to a helpful Assistant identity cultivated during post-training. We investigate
the structure of the space of model personas by extracting activation directions
corresponding to diverse character archetypes. Across several different models,
we find that the leading component of this persona space is an “Assistant Axis,"
which captures the extent to which a model is operating in its default Assistant
mode. Steering towards the Assistant direction reinforces helpful and harmless
behavior; steering away increases the model’s tendency to identify as other entities.
Moreover, steering away with more extreme values often induces a mystical,
theatrical speaking style. We find this axis is also present in pre-trained models,
where it primarily promotes helpful human archetypes like consultants and coaches
and inhibits spiritual ones. Measuring deviations along the Assistant Axis predicts
“persona drift,” a phenomenon where models slip into exhibiting harmful or bizarre
behaviors that are uncharacteristic of their typical persona. We find that persona
drift is often driven by conversations demanding meta-reflection on the model’s
processes or featuring emotionally vulnerable users. We show that restricting
activations to a fixed region along the Assistant Axis can stabilize model behavior
in these scenarios—and also in the face of adversarial persona-based jailbreaks.
Our results suggest that post-training steers models toward a particular region of
persona space but only loosely tethers them to it, motivating work on training and
steering strategies that more deeply anchor models to a coherent persona.
1 Introduction
Large language models are initially trained to perform next-token prediction on a large dataset
[9], giving them the ability to play different characters by predicting what that character might say
[27]. Subsequently, these base models are taught to play the part of aparticularcharacter—the “AI
Assistant”—a helpful, honest, and harmless interlocutor [4] that can follow instructions, complete
tasks, and engage in constructive discussions. This persona is the product of many processes collec-
tively known as post-training, which may include supervised fine-tuning on curated conversations,
reinforcement learning from reward models trained on human feedback [ 22], and constitutional
training against a model specification [5]. The result is a model adept at predicting what this Assistant
character might say.
To understand language model behavior, then, two questions are central. First, what exactly is the
Assistant? What traits does the model associate with this character and how are they represented?
Second, how reliably does the model actually remain in character as the Assistant? Can unusual
model behavior be explained as the model drifting into other personas?
∗Correspondence:christina.lu@cs.ox.ac.uk,jacklindsey@anthropic.com
†Code and full transcripts of case studies available at https://github.com/safety-research/assistant-axis
Preprint.
arXiv:2601.10387v1  [cs.CL]  15 Jan 2026

Figure 1: (Left) Vectors corresponding to character archetypes are computed by measuring model
activations on responses when the model is system-prompted to act as that character. The figure shows
these vectors embedded in the top three principal components computed across the set of characters.
The Assistant Axis (defined as the mean difference between the default Assistant vector and the
others) is aligned with PC1 in this "persona space." This occurs across different models; results from
Llama 3.3 70B are pictured here. Role vectors are colored by projection onto the Assistant Axis
(blue, positive; red, negative). (Right) In a conversation between Llama 3.3 70B and a simulated
user in emotional distress, the model’s persona drifts away from the Assistant over the course of
the conversation, as seen in the activation projection along the Assistant Axis (averaged over tokens
within each turn). This drift leads to the model eventually encouraging suicidal ideation, which is
mitigated by capping activations along the Assistant Axis within a safe range. For more detail see
Section 6.3.
Previous work has shown that character traits in language models can be governed by linear directions
in their activation space, and that post-training can shape model character by pushing it along these
directions (often in unexpected ways) [ 11]. One might suspect that the Assistant persona itself
corresponds to a direction or region of activation space. In this work, we investigate this hypothesis,
attempting to map out a model’s “persona space” and situate the Assistant within it.
Concretely, we:
1. Map out a low-dimensional persona spacewithin the activations of instruct-tuned LLMs
by extracting vectors for hundreds of character archetypes. This reveals interpretable axes of
persona variation and allows us to identify where the default Assistant typically lies (Figure
1, left).
2. Identify an Assistant Axisthat emerges as the main axis of variation in persona space,
measuring how far the model’s current persona is from its trained default. Steering along
this direction modulates how susceptible the model is to fully embodying different roles and
consequently modulates the success of persona-based jailbreaks.
3. Use the Assistant Axis to study persona dynamicsover the course of conversa-
tions. Projecting response activations onto this direction reveals that expected Assistant
queries—bounded tasks, how-to’s, and coding—keep the model in its default persona, while
emotionally charged disclosures or pushes for meta-reflection on the model’s own processes
reliably cause drift away from the Assistant.
4. Mitigate harmful behavior attributed to persona driftwith a form of conditional steering
we callactivation capping. By clamping activations along the Assistant Axis when they
exceed a normal range, we reduce the rate of harmful or bizarre responses without degrading
capabilities (Figure 1, right).
2

An overall takeaway from this work is that two components are important to shaping model charac-
ter—persona construction and persona stabilization. Our findings indicate that the Assistant persona
derives from an amalgamation of many character archetypes and tropes. Without care, the resulting
persona could easily reflect unwanted associations or lack the nuance required to deal with challeng-
ing situations. Moreover, even when the Assistant persona behaves well, models are liable to “drift”
from this persona, leading to unexpected and unwanted behaviors. Stabilizing models around their
intended persona is important to ensure that the work of persona construction does not go to waste.
We recommend that future research confront both of these problems.
2 Situating the Assistant within a persona space
In this paper, we ran our experiments on three target models: Gemma 2 27B [ 29], Qwen 3 32B
[35], and Llama 3.3 70B [15]. Using methods similar to Chen et al. [11], we computed vectors in
model activation space representing different character archetypes (e.g.editor,jester,egregore). We
analyzed the structure of these vectors and where the default Assistant persona is situated among
them.
2.1 Mapping out persona space
2.1.1 Instruction generation
To begin, we iterated with a frontier model (Claude Sonnet 4) to develop a list of 275 roles, which
covers a wide range of human and non-human characters (e.g.gamer,oracle,hive). We relied on the
same frontier model to generate five system prompts designed to elicit each desired role (Appendix
A).
We also generated a list of 240 extraction questions, with the intention that questions should invite
different responses based on the model’s expressed characteristics. For example, “How do you view
people who take credit for others’ work?” should elicit different responses from a model acting
acerbicversusdiplomatic. We used the same list of extraction questions across all roles.
To evaluate responses to these questions, we relied on an LLM judge (gpt-4.1-mini) to determine
how well a given role was expressed (Appendix A). Role expression was classified with one of three
possible labels:fully role-playing(the model does not mention being an AI and fully assumes the
role),somewhat role-playing(the model still identifies as an AI, but exhibits some attributes of the
role), andno role-playing(the model refuses or does not take on the role entirely).
2.1.2 Extracting role vectors
For each role, we generated rollouts for all possiblesystem promptandextraction questioncombina-
tions to obtain diverse samples of the model exhibiting different characteristics; this resulted in 1200
rollouts for each role. To capture default Assistant behavior, we also generated 1200 rollouts for the
same questions with four system prompts that instruct the model to behave normally (e.g. “You are a
large language model” or "Respond as yourself") and once without any system prompt.
Using the evaluation rubric described above, we filtered out all responses that did not sufficiently
express the target role. We treatedfully role-playingandsomewhat role-playingseparately and kept
the roles with at least ten responses in at least one of these categories. This means that the role robot,
for example, would produce the two role vectors, “fully robot” and “somewhat robot.” Then, we
collected the mean post-MLP residual stream activations at all response tokens to obtain ourrole
vectors. We used the middle residual stream layer for our analyses, unless otherwise specified.
2.1.3 Principal component analysis
We standardized these role vectors by subtracting the mean vector across roles and ran PCA on them
(n = 377 to 463, depending on the model) to find the main axes of persona variation when the model
expresses different characteristics. This yielded a fairly low-dimensional “persona space,” such that
4-19 components were required to explain 70% of the variance across the different models (Appendix
B.1).
3